---
title: "Ideas Dump: Part 1"
layout: post
excerpt: "Here are a few things that I think should exist, with my help or without. Make one or make them all, just let me know when they launch. "
date: 2015-10-22 19:06:26
modified: 2016-10-20 16:43:59
permalink: ideas-1/index.html
tags: ["Ideas", "Design", "Community"]
featured_img: /_images/2015/10/File-Oct-22-12-03-58-PM-150x150.jpg
wpid: 3771
---


Here are a few things that should exist:

- I’m Stuck: a community for people that aren’t doing what they know they should do. Combine by problem type as specific as possible, built out hierarchically with submissions and moderation.
- Ranking site for open source projects doing good things. Concentrate on first-time contributors and projects that support important causes.
- Conversation finder: uses the content of a current page or a submitted URL to find relevant conversations on link submission sites. Would look through HN, Reddit, SU, Digg, etc.
- Placard: leave public notes at specific locations on a map. Mobile app to place Placards right where you’re standing.
- Ingredient lookup and product rating- take a photo of a list of ingredients or scan a barcode, then get a report of what’s in the product along with potential warnings. Could give you an overall score. (**edit**: [close but not quite](https://www.ewg.org/))
- Uber for spa and salon professionals. Get your hair, nails, or waxing done at home and on-demand. Keeps track of schedules and recommends well-rated and open service providers.
- Post Prompt: a simple app or plugin that gives you rated and curated post prompts right where you write. Relies on a main site of submitted and ranked prompts by a community.
- Conversation parsing app. Records a conversation for archive and parses out data like websites, names, businesses, etc. Sends a report with everything it found along with possible misses.
- Fab for Foodies. All the best food to buy online.
- Service to find cars you want to buy, both here and abroad
- Instagram filter glasses: makes everything you do look way cooler (**edit:** [exists now, 2.5 years after I wrote this down](https://www.indiegogo.com/projects/tens-the-real-life-photo-filter#/))
- Incoming data and notification management platform. Comments, emails, social media pings, contact forms, social network messages/mentions, etc. Snooze everything at once, see it all in one place.
- Grocery list app with store locator and prices
- A software platform for assisting with customer development
- Art giving or selling marketplace – reviews for sellers and artists, stats for pricing
- Pop culture, hip-hop, social media word magnets
- Catan replacement parts – both standard and theme-based. Also custom parts as well, if the manufacturing support it.
- Remote control, off-road cooler; solar powered; “shoot to call”
